---
date: '2018-06-16T03:13:00.000-07:00'
description: ''
layout: post
published: true
slug: 2018-06-01-parenting-with-probability
tags:
- http://schemas.google.com/blogger/2008/kind#post
- legacy-blogger
time_to_read: 5
title: Parenting with Probability
---

*This was originally posted on blogger [here](https://thedadphd.blogspot.com/2018/06/parenting-with-probability.html)*.

Imagine this scenario that just about every parent has gone through: you're out with your kid, doing something you've done a thousand times before, but this time it goes poorly. Your baby is a grump or they're uncooperative or they're just the worst versions of themselves. And you think to yourself: when did my daughter turn into a tyrant why is she acting like a crazy person. But there’s also a deeper, more concerning question in the back of your head: is my kid a bad kid? In this blog posts were going to talk a bit about probability and how parenting with probability can really help when it comes to these kind of scenarios. The short version of this is “No, your kid probably isn’t the worst. But individual events that are very unlikely can still happen with positive probability.”<br />
<h2>
A very, very brief introduction to probability</h2>
Before we get started we have to talk a little math. And I promise it will just be a little bit. The idea of probability has to do with the affected outcomes of certain events. Say for example you want to know if it's going to rain tomorrow. You could consider the probability of it raining on a given day based on the previous days’ weather. So you could look at the last 10 days worth of weather and count all the days it rained. Then if you divide that number by 10, you have a (rough) estimate of the probability of rain today. If you use this approach you really want to gather much more data than just 10 days, but this is a useful strategy for getting an idea about how likely a certain event is One important thing to note here is that once you have the probability of an event, that only tells you how likely that particular event is. So if the probability of rain is 40%, and it ends up raining, that doesn’t mean that your probability estimate was wrong, it just means that a low-probability event occurred. A better way of thinking about that 40% is: if today happened 100 times, we think that it would rain around 40 of those times.<br />
<br />
One of the main ways to estimate probability is to look at past events. If something has happened many times in the past you can use that information to estimate the probability that goes that it will happen again in the future. So as another example let's say you have a coin and you flip it. You want to know what the probability that the coin will come up heads is. So you flip the coin a million times (let's just say you have a lot of time on your hands) and you count the number of times it came up heads. That number is probably going to be pretty close to half the number of times you flipped the coin. So you can reasonably expect that the next time you flip a coin the odds that it comes up heads are about 50%.<br />
<br />
This kind of information really comes in handy when you're dealing with kids. Kids are monotonous. They do the same thing a lot of times. They go to camp, they go to school, they go to the playgroup, etc. So they have a lot of things that happen a lot of times. It may be the case that the probability that your kid is going to have a meltdown at the playgroup is tiny, but it is still a positive probability. Again just because it is very very unlikely doesn't mean that it will never happen. Even if the probability is low, say 1% or 2%, that is still a positive probability. For any given event the odds of the meltdown are low, but there's still a 1 in 100 chance that it happens.<br />
<h2>
Updating your priors</h2>
Another thing that needs to be talked about here is the idea of a prior probability. In statistics there's a field called Bayesian statistics (it really doesn't matter so don't worry about it) that deals with scenarios when you can't take hundreds of thousands or millions of trials to start estimating your probabilities. Instead, what the Bayesian thing to do is use prior probabilities. These prior probabilities are a before-the-fact estimate of the likelihood of certain events. So for example if you were going to flip a coin that you have never seen before you can reasonably assume that the coin is “fair” and assign a prior probability of 50% to the odds of the coin coming up heads. Same thing can be said for parenting. If this is your first time going to a playgroup, and you want to know how your kid is going to act, you're going to make some estimate of their behavior outcome. If they're normally really good at playgroups and they're normally really easy going with other kids, you can say that the prior probability that they behave themselves is very high, 90% or so.<br />
<br />
The important thing with Bayesian statistics is that you update the priors you have once you start to get some information. So as you start to see data, you use that data to update the prior probabilities and come up with a new set of probabilities for the events that you’re trying to estimate. So again in the case of the play group, before you go the first time you may have this high prior that your kid is going to behave themselves. Now what if you go, and your kid decides that he is the devil incarnate. Well you would use that information to update your prior and introduce the probability that your kid will behave themselves in this particular way. Now the next time they go to the playgroup they may be a saint and you'll use that information to again update your prior on how they'll behave. The important thing is that as you gather data (as you go to the playgroup) you're getting more and more information about the scenario and you're going to have a better and better estimate of how your kid is going to behave. This is useful because if your prior is very bad (you think your kids the devil when he's actually an angel) then as you get more and more data you’re going to update your probabilities until you get closer to the truth. And that truth is that your kid is actually really great at these places. So even though you were crazy worried the first time you can be confident that the next time you go to a play group the odds that your kid will behave themselves is high.<br />
<h2>
Wrapping up</h2>
So this was obviously a quick-and-dirty introduction to probability with very little detail but hopefully a lot of information. The key point is that using information from probability can be very helpful when you're dealing with your kids. Kids are very consistent in their behaviors most of the time. But there will be times when they act out of character. It's important to know that these events are low probability events but they are still possible just because any event with positive probability is possible (go ahead and say that five times fast).<br />
<div>
<br /></div>